# JDBC Transactions

**Content**

[1. JDBC Transactions](#1-jdbc-transactions)

[2. Commit and Rollback](#2-commit-and-rollback)

[3. Using Savepoints](#3-using-savepoints)

[4. References](#4-references)

# 1. JDBC Transactions

-   If your JDBC Connection is in *auto-commit* mode, which it is by default, then every SQL statement is committed to the database upon its completion.
-   That may be fine for simple applications, but there are three reasons why you may want to turn off the auto-commit and manage your own transactions:
1.  To increase performance.
2.  To maintain the integrity of business processes.
3.  To use distributed transactions.
-   Transactions enable you to control if, and when, changes are applied to the database.
-   It treats a single SQL statement or a group of SQL statements as one logical unit, and if any statement fails, the whole transaction fails.
-   To enable manual- transaction support instead of the *auto-commit* mode that the JDBC driver uses by default, use the Connection object's **setAutoCommit()** method.
-   If you pass a boolean false to setAutoCommit( ), you turn off auto-commit.
-   You can pass a boolean true to turn it back on again.
-   For example, if you have a Connection object named conn, code the following to turn off auto-commit:

```java
conn.setAutoCommit(false);
```

# 2. Commit and Rollback

-   Once you are done with your changes and you want to commit the changes then call **commit()** method on connection object as follows:

```java
conn.commit( );
```

-   Otherwise, to roll back updates to the database made using the Connection named conn, use the following code:

```java
conn.rollback( );
```

-   The following example illustrates the use of a commit and rollback object:

```java
try{
    //Assume a valid connection object conn
    conn.setAutoCommit(false);
    Statement stmt = conn.createStatement();
    String SQL = "INSERT INTO Employees " +"VALUES (106, 20, 'Rita', 'Tez')";
    stmt.executeUpdate(SQL);
    //Submit a malformed SQL statement that breaks
    String SQL = "INSERTED IN Employees " +"VALUES (107, 22, 'Sita', 'Singh')";
    stmt.executeUpdate(SQL);
    // If there is no error.
    conn.commit();
}catch(SQLException se){
    // If there is any error.
    conn.rollback();
}
```

-   In this case, none of the above INSERT statement would success and everything would be rolled back.

# 3. Using Savepoints

-   The new JDBC 3.0 Savepoint interface gives you the additional transactional control.
-   Most modern DBMS, support savepoints within their environments such as Oracle's PL/SQL.
-   When you set a savepoint you define a logical rollback point within a transaction.
-   If an error occurs past a savepoint, you can use the rollback method to undo either all the changes or only the changes made after the savepoint.
-   The Connection object has two new methods that help you manage savepoints:
1.  **setSavepoint(String savepointName)** − Defines a new savepoint. It also returns a Savepoint object.
2.  **releaseSavepoint(Savepoint savepointName)** − Deletes a savepoint. Notice that it requires a Savepoint object as a parameter. This object is usually a savepoint generated by the setSavepoint() method.
-   There is one **rollback (String savepointName)** method, which rolls back work to the specified savepoint.
-   The following example illustrates the use of a Savepoint object:

```java
try{
    //Assume a valid connection object conn
    conn.setAutoCommit(false);
    Statement stmt = conn.createStatement();
    //set a Savepoint
    Savepoint savepoint1 = conn.setSavepoint("Savepoint1");
    String SQL = "INSERT INTO Employees " +"VALUES (106, 20, 'Rita', 'Tez')";
    stmt.executeUpdate(SQL);
    //Submit a malformed SQL statement that breaks
    String SQL = "INSERTED IN Employees " +"VALUES (107, 22, 'Sita', 'Tez')";
    stmt.executeUpdate(SQL);
    // If there is no error, commit the changes.
    conn.commit();
}catch(SQLException se){
    // If there is any error.
    conn.rollback(savepoint1);
}
```

-   In this case, none of the above INSERT statement would success and everything would be rolled back.

# 4. References

1.  https://www.tutorialspoint.com/jdbc/jdbc-transactions.htm
